---
layout: post
title: Sets
date: 2019-10-29 15:11 +0530
---
  # Set in Java

    - Set is an interface which extends Collection. It is an unordered collection of objects in which duplicate values cannot be stored.
    - Basically, Set is implemented by HashSet, LinkedHashSet or TreeSet (sorted representation).
    - Set has various methods to add, remove clear, size, etc to enhance the usage of this interface

``` java
    // Java code for adding elements in Set 
import java.util.*; 
public class Set_example 
{ 
	public static void main(String[] args) 
	{ 
		// Set deonstration using HashSet 
		Set<String> hash_Set = new HashSet<String>(); 
		hash_Set.add("Geeks"); 
		hash_Set.add("For"); 
		hash_Set.add("Geeks"); 
		hash_Set.add("Example"); 
		hash_Set.add("Set"); 
		System.out.print("Set output without the duplicates"); 

		System.out.println(hash_Set); 

		// Set deonstration using TreeSet 
		System.out.print("Sorted Set after passing into TreeSet"); 
		Set<String> tree_Set = new TreeSet<String>(hash_Set); 
		System.out.println(tree_Set); 
	} 
}
```

(Please note that we have entered a duplicate entity but it is not displayed in the output. Also, we can directly sort the entries by passing the unordered Set in as the parameter of TreeSet).

# Now we will see some of the basic operations on the Set i.e. Union, Intersection and Difference.

# Union
In this, we could simply add one Set with other. Since the Set will itself not allow any duplicate entries, we need not take care of the common values.

# Intersection

We just need to retain the common values from both Sets.

# Difference

We just need to remove all the values of one Set from the other.

``` java
// Java code for demonstrating union, intersection and difference 
// on Set 
import java.util.*; 
public class Set_example 
{ 
	public static void main(String args[]) 
	{ 
		Set<Integer> a = new HashSet<Integer>(); 
		a.addAll(Arrays.asList(new Integer[] {1, 3, 2, 4, 8, 9, 0})); 
		Set<Integer> b = new HashSet<Integer>(); 
		b.addAll(Arrays.asList(new Integer[] {1, 3, 7, 5, 4, 0, 7, 5})); 

		// To find union 
		Set<Integer> union = new HashSet<Integer>(a); 
		union.addAll(b); 
		System.out.print("Union of the two Set"); 
		System.out.println(union); 

		// To find intersection 
		Set<Integer> intersection = new HashSet<Integer>(a); 
		intersection.retainAll(b); 
		System.out.print("Intersection of the two Set"); 
		System.out.println(intersection); 

		// To find the symmetric difference 
		Set<Integer> difference = new HashSet<Integer>(a); 
		difference.removeAll(b); 
		System.out.print("Difference of the two Set"); 
		System.out.println(difference); 
	} 
} 

```

# HashSet in Java

The HashSet class implements the Set interface, backed by a hash table which is actually a HashMap instance. No guarantee is made as to the iteration order of the set which means that the class does not guarantee the constant order of elements over time. This class permits the null element. The class also offers constant time performance for the basic operations like add, remove, contains and size assuming the hash function disperses the elements properly among the buckets, which we shall see further in the article.
Few important features of HashSet are:

* Implements Set Interface.
* Underlying data structure for HashSet is hashtable.
* As it implements the Set Interface, duplicate values are not allowed.
* Objects that you insert in HashSet are not guaranteed to be inserted in same order. Objects are inserted based on their hash code.
* NULL elements are allowed in HashSet.
* HashSet also implements Searlizable and Cloneable interfaces.

Constructors in HashSet:

1. HashSet h = new HashSet();

    Default initial capacity is 16 and default load factor is 0.75.

2. HashSet h = new HashSet(int initialCapacity);

    default loadFactor of 0.75

3. HashSet h = new HashSet(int initialCapacity, float loadFactor);
4. HashSet h = new HashSet(Collection C);

``` java

// Java program to demonstrate working of HashSet 
import java.util.*; 

class Test 
{ 
	public static void main(String[]args) 
	{ 
		HashSet<String> h = new HashSet<String>(); 

		// Adding elements into HashSet usind add() 
		h.add("India"); 
		h.add("Australia"); 
		h.add("South Africa"); 
		h.add("India");// adding duplicate elements 

		// Displaying the HashSet 
		System.out.println(h); 
		System.out.println("List contains India or not:" + 
						h.contains("India")); 

		// Removing items from HashSet using remove() 
		h.remove("Australia"); 
		System.out.println("List after removing Australia:"+h); 

		// Iterating over hash set items 
		System.out.println("Iterating over list:"); 
		Iterator<String> i = h.iterator(); 
		while (i.hasNext()) 
			System.out.println(i.next()); 
	} 
} 
```

# Methods in HashSet:

1. boolean add(E e): Used to add the specified element if it is not present, if it is present then return false.
2. void clear(): Used to remove all the elements from set.
3. boolean contains(Object o): Used to return true if an element is present in set.
4. boolean remove(Object o): Used to remove the element if it is present in set.
5. Iterator iterator(): Used to return an iterator over the element in the set.
6. boolean isEmpty(): Used to check whether the set is empty or not. Returns true for empty and false for non-empty condition for set.
7. int size(): Used to return the size of the set.
8. Object clone(): Used to create a shallow copy of the set.# Linked HashSet

A LinkedHashSet is an ordered version of HashSet that maintains a doubly-linked List across all elements. When the iteration order is needed to be maintained this class is used. When iterating through a HashSet the order is unpredictable, while a LinkedHashSet lets us iterate through the elements in the order in which they were inserted. When cycling through LinkedHashSet using an iterator, the elements will be returned in the order in which they were inserted.

``` java
LinkedHashSet<String> hs = new LinkedHashSet<String>();
```

* Contains unique elements only like HashSet. It extends HashSet class and implements Set interface.
* Maintains insertion order.
1. LinkedHashSet(): This constructor is used to create a default HashSet.
2. LinkedHashSet(Collection C): Used in initializing the HashSet with the eleements of the collection C
3. LinkedHashSet(int size): Used to initialize the size of the LinkedHashSet with the integer mentioned in the parameter.
4. LinkedHashSet(int capacity, float fillRatio): Can be used to initialize both the capacity and the fill ratio, also called the load capacity of the 5.

Methods in LinkedHashSet:

* spliterator?(): This method creates a late-binding and fail-fast Spliterator over the elements in this set.
* clear?(): This method removes all of the elements from this set.
* contains?(Object o): This method returns true if this set contains the specified element.

``` java
import java.util.LinkedHashSet; 
public class Demo 
{ 
	public static void main(String[] args) 
	{ 
		LinkedHashSet<String> linkedset = 
						new LinkedHashSet<String>(); 

		// Adding element to LinkedHashSet 
		linkedset.add("A"); 
		linkedset.add("B"); 
		linkedset.add("C"); 
		linkedset.add("D"); 

		// This will not add new element as A already exists 
		linkedset.add("A"); 
		linkedset.add("E"); 

		System.out.println("Size of LinkedHashSet = " + 
									linkedset.size()); 
		System.out.println("Original LinkedHashSet:" + linkedset); 
		System.out.println("Removing D from LinkedHashSet: " + 
							linkedset.remove("D")); 
		System.out.println("Trying to Remove Z which is not "+ 
							"present: " + linkedset.remove("Z")); 
		System.out.println("Checking if A is present=" + 
							linkedset.contains("A")); 
		System.out.println("Updated LinkedHashSet: " + linkedset); 
	} 
} 
```

# Sorted Set

Methods of Sorted Set interface:

1. comparator() : Returns the comparator used to order the elements in this set, or null if this set uses the natural ordering of its elements.
2. first() : Returns the first (lowest) element currently in this set.
3. headSet(E toElement) : Returns a view of the portion of this set whose elements are strictly less than toElement.
4. last() : Returns the last (highest) element currently in this set.
5. subSet(E fromElement, E toElement) : Returns a view of the portion of this set whose elements range from fromElement, inclusive, to toElement, exclusive.
6. tailSet(E fromElement) : Returns a view of the portion of this set whose elements are greater than or equal to fromElement.

``` java
			
// A Java program to demonstrate working of SortedSet 
import java.util.SortedSet; 
import java.util.TreeSet; 

public class Main 
{ 
	public static void main(String[] args) 
	{ 
		// Create a TreeSet and inserting elements 
		SortedSet<String> sites = new TreeSet<>(); 
		sites.add("practice"); 
		sites.add("geeksforgeeks"); 
		sites.add("quiz"); 
		sites.add("code"); 

		System.out.println("Sorted Set: " + sites); 
		System.out.println("First: " + sites.first()); 
		System.out.println("Last: " + sites.last()); 

		// Getting elements before quiz (Excluding) in a sortedSet 
		SortedSet<String> beforeQuiz = sites.headSet("quiz"); 
		System.out.println(beforeQuiz); 

		// Getting elements between code (Including) and 
		// practice (Excluding) 
		SortedSet<String> betweenCodeAndQuiz = 
								sites.subSet("code","practice"); 
		System.out.println(betweenCodeAndQuiz); 

		// Getting elements after code (Including) 
		SortedSet<String> afterCode = sites.tailSet("code"); 
		System.out.println(afterCode); 
	} 
} 

```

* Output 

``` 
Sorted Set: [code 1="geeksforgeeks," 2="practice," 3="quiz" language=","]
First: code
Last: quiz
[code, geeksforgeeks, practice]
[code, geeksforgeeks ]
[code, geeksforgeeks, practice, quiz]
```

# TreeSet

``` java
    // Java program to demonstrate insertions in TreeSet 
import java.util.*; 

class TreeSetDemo { 
	public static void main(String[] args) 
	{ 
		TreeSet<String> ts1 = new TreeSet<String>(); 

		// Elements are added using add() method 
		ts1.add("A"); 
		ts1.add("B"); 
		ts1.add("C"); 

		// Duplicates will not get insert 
		ts1.add("C"); 

		// Elements get stored in default natural 
		// Sorting Order(Ascending) 
		System.out.println(ts1); 
	} 
} 
 ```

* void add(Object o): This method will add specified element according to some sorting order in TreeSet. Duplicate entires will not get added.

* boolean addAll(Collection c): This method will add all elements of specified Collection to the set. Elements in Collection should be homogeneous otherwise ClassCastException will be thrown. Duplicate Entries of Collection will not be added to TreeSet.

* void clear(): This method will remove all the elements.

* boolean contains(Object o): This method will return true if given element is present in TreeSet else it will return false.

* Object first(): This method will return first element in TreeSet if TreeSet is not null else it will throw NoSuchElementException.

* Object last(): This method will return last element in TreeSet if TreeSet is not null else it will throw NoSuchElementException.

* SortedSet headSet(Object toElement): This method will return elements of TreeSet which are less than the specified element.

* SortedSet tailSet(Object fromElement): This method will return elements of TreeSet which are greater than or equal to the specified element.

* SortedSet subSet(Object fromElement, Object toElement): This method will return elements ranging from fromElement to toElement.fromElement is inclusive and toElement is exclusive.

* boolean isEmpty(): This method is used to return true if this set contains no elements or is empty and false for the opposite case.

* Object clone(): The method is used to return a shallow copy of the set, which is just a simple copied set.

* int size(): This method is used to return the size of the set or the number of elements present in the set.

* boolean remove(Object o): This method is used to return a specific element from the set.

* Iterator iterator(): Returns an iterator for iterating over the elements of the set.

* Comparator comparator(): This method will return Comparator used to sort elements in TreeSet or it will return null if default natural sorting order is used.

* ceiling​(E e): This method returns the least element in this set greater than or equal to the given element, or null if there is no such element.

* descendingIterator​(): This method returns an iterator over the elements in this set in descending order.

* descendingSet​(): This method returns a reverse order view of the elements contained in this set.

* floor​(E e): This method returns the greatest element in this set less than or equal to the given element, or null if there is no such element.

* higher​(E e): This method returns the least element in this set strictly greater than the given element, or null if there is no such element.

* lower​(E e): This method returns the greatest element in this set strictly less than the given element, or null if there is no such element.

* pollFirst​(): This method retrieves and removes the first (lowest) element, or returns null if this set is empty.

* pollLast​(): This method retrieves and removes the last (highest) element, or returns null if this set is empty.

* spliterator​(): This method creates a late-binding and fail-fast Spliterator over the elements in this set.

