---
layout: post
title: Lists
date: 2019-10-29 15:15 +0530
---

# List In JAVA

The Java.util. List is a child interface of Collection. It is an ordered collection of objects in which duplicate values can be stored. Since List preserves the insertion order, it allows positional access and insertion of elements. List Interface is implemented by ArrayList, LinkedList, Vector and Stack classes.

``` 
List a = new ArrayList();
List b = new LinkedList();
List c = new Vector(); 
List d = new Stack(); 
```

* Operations on List:

List Interface extends Collection, hence it supports all the operations of Collection Interface, along with following additional operations:

* Positional Access:

    List allows add, remove, get and set operations based on numerical positions of elements in List. List provides following methods for these operations:

    - void add(int index,Object O): This method adds given element at specified index.
    - boolean addAll(int index, Collection c): This method adds all elements from specified collection to list. First element gets inserted at given index. If there is already an element at that position, that element and other subsequent elements(if any) are shifted to the right by increasing their index.
    - Object remove(int index): This method removes an element from the specified index. It shifts subsequent elements(if any) to left and decreases their indexes by 1.
    - Object get(int index): This method returns element at the specified index.
    - Object set(int index, Object new): This method replaces element at given index with new element. This function returns the element which was just replaced by new element.

``` java
    // Java program to demonstrate positional access 
    // operations on List interface 
    import java.util.*; 
      
    public class ListDemo 
    { 
        public static void main (String[] args) 
        { 
            // Creating a list 
            List<Integer> l1 = new ArrayList<Integer>(); 
            l1.add(0, 1);  // adds 1 at 0 index 
            l1.add(1, 2);  // adds 2 at 1 index 
            System.out.println(l1);  // [1, 2] 
      
            // Creating another list 
            List<Integer> l2 = new ArrayList<Integer>(); 
            l2.add(1); 
            l2.add(2); 
            l2.add(3); 
      
            // Will add list l2 from 1 index 
            l1.addAll(1, l2); 
            System.out.println(l1); 
      
            // Removes element from index 1 
            l1.remove(1);      
            System.out.println(l1); // [1, 2, 3, 2] 
      
            // Prints element at index 3 
            System.out.println(l1.get(3)); 
      
            // Replace 0th element with 5 
            l1.set(0, 5);    
            System.out.println(l1);  
        } 
    } 
    Output:

    [1, 2]
    [1, 1, 2, 3, 2]
    [1, 2, 3, 2]
    2
    [5, 2, 3, 2]
```

* Search:

    List provides methods to search element and returns its numeric position. Following two methods are supported by List for this operation:

    - int indexOf(Object o): This method returns first occurrence of given element or -1 if element is not present in list.
    - int lastIndexOf(Object o): This method returns the last occurrence of given element or -1 if element is not present in list.

``` java
    // Java program to demonstrate search 
    // operations on List interface 
    import java.util.*; 
      
    public class ListDemo 
    { 
        public static void main(String[] args) 
        { 
            // Type safe array list, stores only string 
            List<String> l = new ArrayList<String>(5); 
            l.add("Geeks"); 
            l.add("for"); 
            l.add("Geeks"); 
      
            // Using indexOf() and lastIndexOf() 
            System.out.println("first index of Geeks:" + 
                                    l.indexOf("Geeks")); 
            System.out.println("last index of Geeks:" + 
                                l.lastIndexOf("Geeks")); 
            System.out.println("Index of element"+ 
                " not present : " + l.indexOf("Hello")); 
        } 
    } 
    Output:

    first index of Geeks:0
    last index of Geeks:2
    Index of element not present : -1
```

* Iteration:
    - ListIterator(extends Iterator) is used to iterate over List element. List iterator is bidirectional iterator. For more details about ListIterator refer Iterators in Java.

    Range-view:

    - List Interface provides a method to get the List view of the portion of given List between two indices. Following is the method supported by List for range view operation.
        + List subList(int fromIndex,int toIndex):This method returns List view of specified List between fromIndex(inclusive) and toIndex(exclusive).

``` java
    // Java program to demonstrate subList operation 
    // on List interface. 
    import java.util.*; 
    public class ListDemo 
    { 
        public static void main (String[] args) 
        { 
            // Type safe array list, stores only string 
            List<String> l = new ArrayList<String>(5); 
      
            l.add("GeeksforGeeks"); 
            l.add("Practice"); 
            l.add("GeeksQuiz"); 
            l.add("IDE"); 
            l.add("Courses"); 
      
            List<String> range = new ArrayList<String>(); 
      
            // Return List between 2nd(including) 
            // and 4th element(excluding) 
            range = l.subList(2, 4); 
      
            System.out.println(range);  
        } 
    } 
    Output:

    [GeeksQuiz, IDE]
```

# ArrayList in Java

Constructors in Java ArrayList:

01. ArrayList(): This constructor is used to build an empty array list
02. ArrayList(Collection c): This constructor is used to build an array list initialized with the elements from collection c
03. ArrayList(int capacity): This constructor is used to build an array list with initial capacity being specified

``` java
// Java program to demonstrate working of ArrayList in Java 
import java.io.*; 
import java.util.*; 

class arrayli 
{ 
	public static void main(String[] args) 
					throws IOException 
	{ 
		// size of ArrayList 
		int n = 5; 

		//declaring ArrayList with initial size n 
		ArrayList<Integer> arrli = new ArrayList<Integer>(n); 

		// Appending the new element at the end of the list 
		for (int i=1; i<=n; i++) 
			arrli.add(i); 

		// Printing elements 
		System.out.println(arrli); 

		// Remove element at index 3 
		arrli.remove(3); 

		// Displaying ArrayList after deletion 
		System.out.println(arrli); 

		// Printing elements one by one 
		for (int i=0; i<arrli.size(); i++) 
			System.out.print(arrli.get(i)+" "); 
	} 
} 

```

* Methods in Java ArrayList:

01. forEach​(Consumer action): Performs the given action for each element of the Iterable until all elements have been processed or the action throws an exception.
02. retainAll​(Collection c): Retains only the elements in this list that are contained in the specified collection.
03. removeIf​(Predicate filter): Removes all of the elements of this collection that satisfy the given predicate.
04. contains​(Object o): Returns true if this list contains the specified element.
05. remove​(int index): Removes the element at the specified position in this list.
06. remove​(Object o): Removes the first occurrence of the specified element from this list, if it is present.
07. get​(int index): Returns the element at the specified position in this list.
08. subList​(int fromIndex, int toIndex): Returns a view of the portion of this list between the specified fromIndex, inclusive, and toIndex, exclusive.
09. spliterator​(): Creates a late-binding and fail-fast Spliterator over the elements in this list.
10. set​(int index, E element): Replaces the element at the specified position in this list with the specified element.
11. size​(): Returns the number of elements in this list.
12. removeAll​(Collection c): Removes from this list all of its elements that are contained in the specified collection.
13. ensureCapacity​(int minCapacity): Increases the capacity of this ArrayList instance, if necessary, to ensure that it can hold at least the number of elements specified by the minimum capacity argument.
14. listIterator​(): Returns a list iterator over the elements in this list (in proper sequence).
15. listIterator​(int index): Returns a list iterator over the elements in this list (in proper sequence), starting at the specified position in the list.
16. isEmpty​(): Returns true if this list contains no elements.
17. removeRange​(int fromIndex, int toIndex): Removes from this list all of the elements whose index is between fromIndex, inclusive, and toIndex, exclusive.
18. void clear(): This method is used to remove all the elements from any list.
19. void add(int index, Object element): This method is used to insert a specific element at a specific position index in a list.
20. void trimToSize(): This method is used to trim the capacity of the instance of the ArrayLis to the list’s current size.
21. int indexOf(Object O): The
22. index the first occurrence of a specific element is either returned, or -1 in case the element is not in the list.
23. int lastIndexOf(Object O): The index the last occurrence of a specific element is either returned, or -1 in case the element is not in the list.
24. Object clone(): This method is used to return a shallow copy of an ArrayList.
25. Object[] toArray(): This method is used to return an array containing all of the elements in the list in correct order.
26. Object[] toArray(Object[] O): It is also used to return an array containing all of the elements in this list in the correct order same as the previous method.
27. boolean addAll(Collection C): This method is used to append all the elements from a specific collection to the end of the mentioned list, in such a order that the values are returned by the specified collection’s iterator.
28. boolean add(Object o): This method is used to append a specificd element to the end of a list.
29. boolean addAll(int index, Collection C): Used to insert all of the elements starting at the specified position from a specific collection into the mentioned list.# Linked List

Constructors for Java LinkedList:

01. LinkedList(): Used to create an empty linked list.
02. LinkedList(Collection C): Used to create a ordered list which contains all the elements of a specified collection, as returned by the collection’s iterator.

``` java
// Java code for Linked List implementation 

import java.util.*; 

public class Test 
{ 
	public static void main(String args[]) 
	{ 
		// Creating object of class linked list 
		LinkedList<String> object = new LinkedList<String>(); 

		// Adding elements to the linked list 
		object.add("A"); 
		object.add("B"); 
		object.addLast("C"); 
		object.addFirst("D"); 
		object.add(2, "E"); 
		object.add("F"); 
		object.add("G"); 
		System.out.println("Linked list : " + object); 

		// Removing elements from the linked list 
		object.remove("B"); 
		object.remove(3); 
		object.removeFirst(); 
		object.removeLast(); 
		System.out.println("Linked list after deletion: " + object); 

		// Finding elements in the linked list 
		boolean status = object.contains("E"); 

		if(status) 
			System.out.println("List contains the element 'E' "); 
		else
			System.out.println("List doesn't contain the element 'E'"); 

		// Number of elements in the linked list 
		int size = object.size(); 
		System.out.println("Size of linked list = " + size); 

		// Get and set elements from linked list 
		Object element = object.get(2); 
		System.out.println("Element returned by get() : " + element); 
		object.set(2, "Y"); 
		System.out.println("Linked list after change : " + object); 
	} 
} 

```

# Methods for Java LinkedList:

01. add​(int index, E element): This method Inserts the specified element at the specified position in this list.
02. add​(E e): This method Appends the specified element to the end of this list.
03. addAll​(int index, Collection c): This method Inserts all of the elements in the specified collection into this list, starting at the specified position.
04. addAll​(Collection c): This method Appends all of the elements in the specified collection to the end of this list, in the order that they are returned by the specified collection’s iterator.
05. addFirst​(E e): This method Inserts the specified element at the beginning of this list.
06. addLast​(E e): This method Appends the specified element to the end of this list.
07. clear​(): This method removes all of the elements from this list.
08. clone​(): This method returns a shallow copy of this LinkedList.
09. contains​(Object o): This method returns true if this list contains the specified element.
10. descendingIterator​(): This method returns an iterator over the elements in this deque in reverse sequential order.
11. element​(): This method retrieves, but does not remove, the head (first element) of this list.
12. get​(int index): This method returns the element at the specified position in this list.
13. getFirst​(): This method returns the first element in this list.
14. getLast​(): This method returns the last element in this list.
15. indexOf​(Object o): This method returns the index of the first occurrence of the specified element in this list, or -1 if this list does not contain the element.
16. lastIndexOf​(Object o): This method returns the index of the last occurrence of the specified element in this list, or -1 if this list does not contain the element.
17. listIterator​(int index): This method returns a list-iterator of the elements in this list (in proper sequence), starting at the specified position in the list.
18. offer​(E e): This method Adds the specified element as the tail (last element) of this list.
19. offerFirst​(E e): This method Inserts the specified element at the front of this list.
20. offerLast​(E e): This method Inserts the specified element at the end of this list.
21. peek​(): This method retrieves, but does not remove, the head (first element) of this list.
22. peekFirst​(): This method retrieves, but does not remove, the first element of this list, or returns null if this list is empty.
23. peekLast​(): This method retrieves, but does not remove, the last element of this list, or returns null if this list is empty.
24. poll​(): This method retrieves and removes the head (first element) of this list.
25. pollFirst​(): This method retrieves and removes the first element of this list, or returns null if this list is empty.
26. pollLast​(): This method retrieves and removes the last element of this list, or returns null if this list is empty.
27. pop​(): This method Pops an element from the stack represented by this list.
28. push​(E e): This method Pushes an element onto the stack represented by this list.
29. remove​(): This method retrieves and removes the head (first element) of this list.
30. remove​(int index): This method removes the element at the specified position in this list.
31. remove​(Object o): This method removes the first occurrence of the specified element from this list, if it is present.
32. removeFirst​(): This method removes and returns the first element from this list.
33. removeFirstOccurrence​(Object o): This method removes the first occurrence of the specified element in this list (when traversing the list from head to tail).
34. removeLast​(): This method removes and returns the last element from this list.
35. removeLastOccurrence​(Object o): This method removes the last occurrence of the specified element in this list (when traversing the list from head to tail).
37. set​(int index, E element): This method replaces the element at the specified position in this list with the specified element.
38. size​(): This method returns the number of elements in this list.
39. spliterator​(): This method Creates a late-binding and fail-fast Spliterator over the elements in this list.
40. toArray​(): This method returns an array containing all of the elements in this list in proper sequence (from first to last element).
41. toArray​(T[] a): This method returns an array containing all of the elements in this list in proper sequence (from first to last element); the runtime type of the returned array is that of the specified array.# Vectors

The Vector class implements a growable array of objects. Vectors basically fall in legacy classes but now it is fully compatible with collections.

    Vector implements a dynamic array that means it can grow or shrink as required. Like an array, it contains components that can be accessed using an integer index
    They are very similar to ArrayList but Vector is synchronised and have some legacy method which collection framework does not contain.
    It extends AbstractList and implements List interfaces.

# Constructor:

01. Vector(): Creates a default vector of initial capacity is 10.
02. Vector(int size): Creates a vector whose initial capacity is specified by size.
03. Vector(int size, int incr): Creates a vector whose initial capacity is specified by size and increment is specified by incr. It specifies the number of elements to allocate each time that a vector is resized upward.
04. Vector(Collection c): Creates a vector that contains the elements of collection c.# Methods in Vector:
01. boolean add(Object obj): This method appends the specified element to the end of this vector.

``` java
    Syntax: public boolean add(Object obj)
        Returns: true if the specified element is added 
        successfully into the Vector, otherwise it returns false.
        Exception: NA.
```     
```java
    // Java code illustrating add() method 
    import java.util.*; 
    class Vector_demo { 
        public static void main(String[] arg) 
        { 
      
            // create default vector 
            Vector v = new Vector(); 
      
            v.add(1); 
            v.add(2); 
            v.add("geeks"); 
            v.add("forGeeks"); 
            v.add(3); 
      
            System.out.println("Vector is " + v); 
        } 
    }

    Output:

        [1, 2, geeks, forGeeks, 3]
```  

02. void add(int index, Object obj): This method inserts the specified element at the specified position in this Vector.

``` java
        Syntax: public void add(int index, Object obj)
        Returns: NA.
        Exception: IndexOutOfBoundsException, method throws this exception 
        if the index (obj position) we are trying to access is out of range 
        (index  size()).

    // Java code illustrating add() method 
    import java.util.*; 
    class Vector_demo { 
        public static void main(String[] arg) 
        { 
      
            // create default vector 
            Vector v = new Vector(); 
      
            v.add(0, 1); 
            v.add(1, 2); 
            v.add(2, "geeks"); 
            v.add(3, "forGeeks"); 
            v.add(4, 3); 
      
            System.out.println("Vector is " + v); 
        } 
    }

    Output:

        Vector is: [1, 2, geeks, forGeeks, 3]
        
```

03. boolean addAll(Collection c) This method appends all of the elements

    in the specified Collection to the end of this Vector.

``` java
        Syntax: public boolean addAll(Collection c)
        Returns: Returns true if operation succeeded otherwise false.
        Exception: NullPointerException thrown if collection is null.

    // Java code illustrating addAll() 
    import java.util.*; 
    class Vector_demo { 
        public static void main(String[] arg) 
        { 
            ArrayList arr = new ArrayList(); 
            arr.add(3); 
            arr.add("geeks"); 
            arr.add("forgeeks"); 
            arr.add(4); 
      
            // createn default vector 
            Vector v = new Vector(); 
      
            // copying all element of array list int0 vector 
            v.addAll(arr); 
      
            // checking vector v 
            System.out.println("vector v:" + v); 
        } 
    }

    Output:

        vector v:[3, geeks, forgeeks, 4]
        
```

04.  boolean addAll(int index, Collection c) This method inserts all of the elements in the specified Collection into this Vector at the specified.

    position.

``` java
        Syntax: public boolean addAll(int index, Collection c)
        Returns: true if this list changed as a result of the call.
        Exception: IndexOutOfBoundsException -- If the index is out of range, 
        NullPointerException -- If the specified collection is null. 

    // Java code illustrating addAll() 
    import java.util.*; 
    class Vector_demo { 
        public static void main(String[] arg) 
        { 
            ArrayList arr = new ArrayList(); 
            arr.add(3); 
            arr.add("geeks"); 
            arr.add("forgeeks"); 
            arr.add(4); 
      
            // createn default vector 
            Vector v = new Vector(); 
      
            v.add(2); 
            // copying all element of array list int0 vector 
            v.addAll(1, arr); 
      
            // checking vector v 
            System.out.println("vector v:" + v); 
        } 
    }

    Output:

        vector v:[2, 3, geeks, forgeeks, 4]
```

05. void clear() This method removes all of the elements from this vector.

``` java

        Syntax: public void clear()
        Returns: NA.
        Exception: NA.

    // Java code illustrating clear() method 
    import java.util.*; 
    class Vector_demo { 
        public static void main(String[] arg) 
        { 
      
            // create default vector 
            Vector v = new Vector(); 
      
            v.add(0, 1); 
            v.add(1, 2); 
            v.add(2, "geeks"); 
            v.add(3, "forGeeks"); 
            v.add(4, 3); 
      
            System.out.println("Vector is: " + v); 
      
            // clearing the vector 
            v.clear(); 
      
            // checking vector 
            System.out.println("after clearing: " + v); 
        } 
    }

    Output:

        Vector is: [1, 2, geeks, forGeeks, 3]
        after clearing: []
        
```

06.  Object clone() This method returns a clone of this vector.

``` java
        Syntax: public Object clone()
        Returns: a clone of this ArrayList instance.
        Exception: NA.
    // Java code illustrating clone() 
    import java.util.*; 
    class Vector_demo { 
        public static void main(String[] arg) 
        { 
      
            // create default vector 
            Vector v = new Vector(); 
      
            Vector v_clone = new Vector(); 
      
            v.add(0, 1); 
            v.add(1, 2); 
            v.add(2, "geeks"); 
            v.add(3, "forGeeks"); 
            v.add(4, 3); 
      
            v_clone = (Vector)v.clone(); 
      
            // checking vector 
            System.out.println("Clone of v: " + v_clone); 
        } 
    }

    Output:

        Clone of v: [1, 2, geeks, forGeeks, 3]
``` 

07. boolean contains(Object o): This method returns true if this vector contains the specified element.

``` java
        Syntax: public boolean contains(object o)
        Returns: true if the operation is succeeded otherwise false.
        Exception: NA.
    // Java code illustrating contains() method 
    import java.util.*; 
    class Vector_demo { 
        public static void main(String[] arg) 
        { 
      
            // create default vector 
            Vector v = new Vector(); 
      
            v.add(1); 
            v.add(2); 
            v.add("geeks"); 
            v.add("forGeeks"); 
            v.add(3); 
      
            // check whether vector contains "forGeeks" 
            if (v.contains("forGeeks")) 
                System.out.println("forGeeks exists"); 
        } 
    }

    Output:

        forGeeks exists
        
```

08. void ensureCapacity(int minCapacity): This method increases the capacity of this vector, if necessary, to ensure that it can hold at least the number of components specified by the minimum capacity argument .

``` java
        Syntax: public void ensureCapacity(int minCapacity)
        Returns: NA.
        Exception: NA.
    // Java code illustrating ensureCapacity() method 
    import java.util.*; 
    class Vector_demo { 
        public static void main(String[] arg) 
        { 
      
            // create default vector of capacity 10 
            Vector v = new Vector(); 
      
            // ensuring capacity 
            v.ensureCapacity(22); 
      
            // cheking capacity 
            System.out.println("Minimum capacity: " + v.capacity()); 
        } 
    }

    Output:

        Minimum capacity: 22
```

09. Object get(int index):This method returns the element at the specified position in this Vector.

``` java
        Syntax: public Object get(int index)
        Returns: returns the element at specified positions .
        Exception: IndexOutOfBoundsException -- if the index is out of range.

    // Java code illustrating get() methods 
    import java.util.*; 
    class Vector_demo { 
        public static void main(String[] arg) 
        { 
      
            // create default vector of capacity 10 
            Vector v = new Vector(); 
      
            v.add(1); 
            v.add(2); 
            v.add("Geeks"); 
            v.add("forGeeks"); 
            v.add(4); 
      
            // get the element at index 2 
            System.out.println("element at indexx 2 is: " + v.get(2)); 
        } 
    }

    Output:

        element at indexx 2 is: Geeks
        
```

10. int indexOf(Object o): This method returns the index of the first occurrence of the specified element in this vector, or -1 if this vector does not contain the element.

``` java
        Syntax: public int indexOf(Object o)
        Returns: the index of the first occurrence of the specified 
        element in this list, or -1 if this list does not contain the element.
        Exception: NA.

    // Java code illustrating indexOf() method 
    import java.util.*; 
    class Vector_demo { 
        public static void main(String[] arg) 
        { 
      
            // create default vector of capacity 10 
            Vector v = new Vector(); 
      
            v.add(1); 
            v.add(2); 
            v.add("Geeks"); 
            v.add("forGeeks"); 
            v.add(4); 
      
            // get the element at index of Geeks 
            System.out.println("index of Geeks is: " + v.indexOf("Geeks")); 
        } 
    }

    Output:

        index of Geeks is: 2
        
```

11.  boolean isEmpty(): This method tests if this vector has no components.

``` java
        Syntax: public boolean isEmpty()
        Returns: true if vector is empty otherwise false.
        Exception: NA.

    // Java code illustrating isEmpty() method 
    import java.util.*; 
    class Vector_demo { 
        public static void main(String[] arg) 
        { 
      
            // create default vector of capacity 10 
            Vector v = new Vector(); 
      
            v.add(1); 
            v.add(2); 
            v.add("Geeks"); 
            v.add("forGeeks"); 
            v.add(4); 
      
            v.clear(); 
      
            // check whether vector is empty or not 
            if (v.isEmpty()) 
                System.out.println("Vector is clear"); 
        } 
    }

    Output:

        Vector is clear
``` 

12. int lastIndexOf(Object o): This method returns the index of the last occurrence of the specified element in this vector, or -1 if this vector does not contain the element.

``` java
        Syntax: public int lastIndexOf(Object o)
        Returns: returns the index of the last occurrence of the 
        specified element in this list, or -1 if this list does not contain the element.
        Exception: NA.
    // Java code illustrating lastIndexof() 
    import java.util.*; 
    class Vector_demo { 
        public static void main(String[] arg) 
        { 
      
            // create default vector of capacity 10 
            Vector v = new Vector(); 
      
            v.add(1); 
            v.add(2); 
            v.add("Geeks"); 
            v.add("forGeeks"); 
            v.add(4); 
      
            // checking last occurance of 2 
            System.out.println("last occurance of 2 is: " + v.lastIndexOf(2)); 
        } 
    }

    Output:

        last occurance of 2 is: 1
```

13. boolean remove(Object o): This method removes the first occurrence of the specified element in this Vector If the Vector does not contain the element, it is unchanged.

``` java
        Syntax: public boolean remove(Object o)
        Returns: Returns the first occurrence of element.
        Exception: NA.
    // Java code illustrating remove method() 
    import java.util.*; 
    class Vector_demo { 
        public static void main(String[] arg) 
        { 
      
            // create default vector of capacity 10 
            Vector v = new Vector(); 
      
            v.add(1); 
            v.add(2); 
            v.add("Geeks"); 
            v.add("forGeeks"); 
            v.add(4); 
      
            // removing first occurance element at 1 
            v.remove(1); 
      
            // checking vector 
            System.out.println("after removal: " + v); 
        } 
    }

    Output:

        after removal: [1, Geeks, forGeeks, 4]
        
```

14. boolean equals(Object o): This method compares the specified Object with this Vector for equality.

``` java
        Syntax: public boolean equal(Object o)
        Returns: true if operation succeeded otherwise false.
        Exception: NA.
	
    // Java code illustrating equals() method 
    import java.util.*; 
    class Vector_demo { 
        public static void main(String[] arg) 
        { 
      
            // create default vector of capacity 10 
            Vector v = new Vector(); 
      
            v.add(1); 
            v.add(2); 
            v.add("Geeks"); 
            v.add("forGeeks"); 
            v.add(4); 
      
            // second vector 
            Vector v_2nd = new Vector(); 
      
            v_2nd.add(1); 
            v_2nd.add(2); 
            v_2nd.add("Geeks"); 
            v_2nd.add("forGeeks"); 
            v_2nd.add(4); 
      
            if (v.equals(v_2nd)) 
                System.out.println("both vectors are equal"); 
        } 
    }

    Output:

        both vectors are equal
        
```

15.  Object firstElement(): This method returns the first component (the item at index 0) of this vector.

``` java
        Syntax: public Object firstElement()
        Returns: NA.
        Exception: NoSuchElementException -- This exception is returned 
        if this vector has no components.
        
    // Java code illustrating firstElement() method 
    import java.util.*; 
    class Vector_demo { 
        public static void main(String[] arg) 
        { 
      
            // create default vector of capacity 10 
            Vector v = new Vector(); 
      
            v.add(1); 
            v.add(2); 
            v.add("Geeks"); 
            v.add("forGeeks"); 
            v.add(4); 
      
            // first element of vector 
            System.out.println("first element of vector is: " + v.firstElement()); 
        } 
    }

    Output:

        first element of vector is: 1
        
```

16. void trimToSize(): This method trims the capacity of this vector to be the vector’s current size.

``` java
        Syntax: public void trimToSize()
        Returns: NA.
        Exception: NA.
	
    // Java code illustrating trimToSize() method 
    import java.util.*; 
    class Vector_demo { 
        public static void main(String[] arg) 
        { 
      
            // create default vector of capacity 10 
            Vector v = new Vector(); 
      
            v.add(1); 
            v.add(2); 
            v.add("Geeks"); 
            v.add("forGeeks"); 
            v.add(4); 
      
            // checking initial capacity 
            System.out.println("Initial capacity: " + v.capacity()); 
      
            // trim capacity to size 
            v.trimToSize(); 
      
            // checking capacity after triming 
            System.out.println("capacity after triming: " + v.capacity()); 
        } 
    }

    Output:

        Initial capacity: 10
        capacity after triming: 5
```  

17. String toString(): The toString() method is used to return a string representation of this Vector, containing the String representation of each element.

``` java
        Syntax: public String toString()
        Returns:   a string representation of this collection.
        Exception: NA
	
    // Java code illustrating toString() method 
    import java.util.*; 
    class Vector_demo { 
        public static void main(String[] arg) 
        { 
      
            // create default vector of capacity 10 
            Vector v = new Vector(); 
      
            v.add(1); 
            v.add(2); 
            v.add("Geeks"); 
            v.add("forGeeks"); 
            v.add(4); 
      
            // string equivalent of vector 
            System.out.println(" String equivalent of vector: " + v.toString()); 
        } 
    }

    Output:

        String equivalent of vector: [1, 2, Geeks, forGeeks, 4]
```

18. object[ ] toArray(): This method returns a array representation of this Vector, containing the String representation of each element.

``` java
        Syntax: public  object[ ] toArray()
        Returns: an array containing all of the elements in this collection.
        Exception: NA.

    // Java code illustrating toArray() method 
    import java.util.*; 
    class Vector_demo { 
        public static void main(String[] arg) 
        { 
      
            String elements[] = { "M", "N", "O", "P", "Q" }; 
            Set set = new HashSet(Arrays.asList(elements)); 
      
            String[] strObj = new String[set.size()]; 
      
            strObj = (String[])set.toArray(strObj); 
      
            for (int i = 0; i < strObj.length; i++) { 
                System.out.println(strObj[i]); 
            } 
            System.out.println(set); 
        } 
    } 

    Output:

        P
        Q
        M
        N
        O
        [P, Q, M, N, O]
```

19. int size(): This method returns the number of components in this vector.

``` java
        Syntax: public int size()
        Returns: returns the number of components in this vector.
        Exception: NA

    // Java code illustrating size() method 
    import java.util.*; 
    class Vector_demo { 
        public static void main(String[] arg) 
        { 
            // create default vector of capacity 10 
            Vector v = new Vector(); 
      
            v.add(1); 
            v.add(2); 
            v.add("Geeks"); 
            v.add("forGeeks"); 
            v.add(4); 
      
            // size of vector 
            System.out.println(" size of vector: " + v.size()); 
        } 
    } 

    Output:

        size of vector: 5
```   

20. void setSize(int newSize): This method sets the size.

``` java
        Syntax: public void setSize(int newSize)
        Returns: NA.
        Exception: ArrayIndexOutOfBoundsException -- This exception is thrown 
        if the new size is negative.
    // Java code illustrating setSize() method 
    import java.util.*; 
    class Vector_demo { 
        public static void main(String[] arg) 
        { 
            // create default vector of capacity 10 
            Vector v = new Vector(); 
      
            v.add(1); 
            v.add(2); 
            v.add("Geeks"); 
            v.add("forGeeks"); 
            v.add(4); 
      
            // setting new size of vector 
            v.setSize(13); 
      
            // size of vector 
            System.out.println("size of vector: " + v.size()); 
        } 
    } 

    Output:

        size of vector: 13
```

21. void setElementAt(Object obj, int index): This method sets the component at the specified index of this vector to be the specified object.

``` java
        Syntax: public void setElementAt(E obj, int index)
        Returns: NA.
        Exception: ArrayIndexOutOfBoundsException -- This exception is thrown 
        if the accessed index is out of range.
    // Java code illustrating setElementAt() method 
    import java.util.*; 
    class Vector_demo { 
        public static void main(String[] arg) 
        { 
            // create default vector of capacity 10 
            Vector v = new Vector(); 
      
            v.add(1); 
            v.add(2); 
            v.add("Geeks"); 
            v.add("forGeeks"); 
            v.add(4); 
      
            // set 4 at the place of 2 
            v.setElementAt(4, 1); 
      
            System.out.println("vector: " + v); 
        } 
    } 

    Output:

        vector: [1, 4, Geeks, forGeeks, 4]
```

22. retainAll(Collection c): This method retains only the elements in this Vector that are contained in the specified Collection.

``` java
        Syntax: public boolean retainAll(Collection c)
        Returns: true if this Vector is changed as a result of the call.
        Exception: NullPointerException -- This exception is thrown if the 
        specified collection is null.

    // Java code illustrating retainAll() method 
    import java.util.*; 
    class Vector_demo { 
        public static void main(String[] arg) 
        { 
            Vector vec = new Vector(7); 
            Vector vecretain = new Vector(4); 
      
            // use add() method to add elements in the vector 
            vec.add(1); 
            vec.add(2); 
            vec.add(3); 
            vec.add(4); 
            vec.add(5); 
            vec.add(6); 
            vec.add(7); 
      
            // this elements will be retained 
            vecretain.add(5); 
            vecretain.add(3); 
            vecretain.add(2); 
      
            System.out.println("Calling retainAll()"); 
            vec.retainAll(vecretain); 
      
            // let us print all the elements available in vector 
            System.out.println("Numbers after removal :- "); 
      
            Iterator itr = vec.iterator(); 
      
            while (itr.hasNext()) { 
                System.out.println(itr.next()); 
            } 
        } 
    } 

    Output:

        Calling retainAll()
        Numbers after removal :- 
        2
        3
        5
        
```

23. void removeAllElements(): This method removes all components from this vector and sets its size to zero.

``` java
        Syntax: public void removeAllElements()
        Returns: NA.
        Exception: NA.
    // Java code illustrating removeAllElements() method 
    import java.util.*; 
    class Vector_demo { 
        public static void main(String[] arg) 
        { 
            Vector vec = new Vector(7); 
      
            // use add() method to add elements in the vector 
            vec.add(1); 
            vec.add(2); 
            vec.add(3); 
            vec.add(4); 
            vec.add(5); 
            vec.add(6); 
            vec.add(7); 
      
            // remove all elements 
            vec.removeAllElements(); 
      
            // checking vector's size 
            System.out.println("Size: " + vec.size()); 
      
            // checking vector's componenets 
            System.out.println("vector's componenets: " + vec); 
        } 
    } 

    Output:

        Size: 0
        vectors componenets : []
```   

24. Object lastElement(): This method returns the last component of the vector.

``` java 
        Syntax: public Object lastElement()
        Returns: returns the last component of the vector, 
        i.e., the component at index size() - 1.
        Exception: NoSuchElementException -- This exception is thrown 
        if this vector is empty
    // Java code illustrating lastElement() method 
    import java.util.*; 
    class Vector_demo { 
        public static void main(String[] arg) 
        { 
            Vector vec = new Vector(7); 
      
            // use add() method to add elements in the vector 
            vec.add(1); 
            vec.add(2); 
            vec.add(3); 
            vec.add(4); 
            vec.add(5); 
            vec.add(6); 
            vec.add(7); 
      
            // checking last element of vector 
            System.out.println("vector's last componenets: " + vec.lastElement()); 
        } 
    } 

    Output:

        vector's last componenets: 7
```

25. int hashCode(): This method returns the hash code value for this Vector.

``` java
        Syntax: public int hashCode()
        Returns: returns the hash code value(int) for this list.
        Exception: NA.
    // Java code illustrating hashCode() method 
    import java.util.*; 
    class Vector_demo { 
        public static void main(String[] arg) 
        { 
            Vector vec = new Vector(7); 
      
            // use add() method to add elements in the vector 
            vec.add(1); 
            vec.add(2); 
            vec.add(3); 
            vec.add(4); 
            vec.add(5); 
            vec.add(6); 
            vec.add(7); 
      
            // checking hash code 
            System.out.println("Hash code: " + vec.hashCode()); 
        } 
    } 

    Output:

        Hash code: -1604500253

```  

26. boolean removeElement(Object obj): This method removes the first occurrence of the argument from this vector.

``` java
        Syntax: public boolean removeElement(Object obj)
        Returns: true if operation is succeeded otherwise false.
        Exception: 

    // Java code illustrating removeElement() 
    import java.util.*; 
    class Vector_demo { 
        public static void main(String[] arg) 
        { 
            Vector vec = new Vector(7); 
      
            // use add() method to add elements in the vector 
            vec.add(1); 
            vec.add(2); 
            vec.add(3); 
            vec.add(4); 
            vec.add(5); 
            vec.add(6); 
            vec.add(7); 
      
            // remove an element 
            vec.removeElement(5); 
      
            // checking vector 
            System.out.println("Vector after removal: " + vec); 
        } 
    } 

    Output:

        Vector after removal: [1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7]
        
```

27. void copyInto(Object[ ] anArray):This method copies the components of this vector into the specified array.

``` java
        Syntax: public void copyInto(Object[] anArray)
        Returns: NA.
        Exception: NullPointerException -- if the given array is null.
    // Java code illustrating copyInto() method 
    import java.util.*; 
    class Vector_demo { 
        public static void main(String[] arg) 
        { 
            Vector vec = new Vector(7); 
      
            // use add() method to add elements in the vector 
            vec.add(1); 
            vec.add(2); 
            vec.add(3); 
            vec.add(4); 
            vec.add(5); 
            vec.add(6); 
            vec.add(7); 
      
            Integer[] arr = new Integer[7]; 
      
            // copy componnent of vector int array arr 
            vec.copyInto(arr); 
      
            System.out.println("elements in array arr: "); 
            for (Integer num : arr) { 
                System.out.println(num); 
            } 
        } 
    } 

    Output:

        elements in array arr: 
        1
        2
        3
        4
        5
        6
        7
        
```

28. int capacity(): This method returns the current capacity of this vector.

``` java
        Syntax: public int capacity()
        returns:  returns the current capacity of the 
        vector as an integer value. Here capacity means the length of 
        its internal data array, kept in the field elementData of this vector.
         Exception: NA.
    // Java code illustrating capacity() method 
    import java.util.*; 
    class Vector_demo { 
        public static void main(String[] arg) 
        { 
            Vector vec = new Vector(7); 
      
            // use add() method to add elements in the vector 
            vec.add(1); 
            vec.add(2); 
            vec.add(3); 
            vec.add(4); 
            vec.add(5); 
            vec.add(6); 
            vec.add(7); 
      
            // checking capacity 
            System.out.println("Capacity of vector: " + vec.capacity()); 
        } 
    } 

    Output:

        Capacity of vector: 7
        
```

29.  void insertElementAt(Object obj, int index): This method inserts the specified object as a component in this vector at the specified index.

``` java
        Syntax: public void insertElementAt(E obj, int index)
        Returns: NA.
        Exception: ArrayIndexOutOfBoundsException -- This exception is thrown
        if the index is invalid.
    // Java code illustrating insertElementAt() method 
    import java.util.*; 
    class Vector_demo { 
        public static void main(String[] arg) 
        { 
            Vector vec = new Vector(7); 
      
            // use add() method to add elements in the vector 
            vec.add(1); 
            vec.add(2); 
            vec.add(3); 
            vec.add(4); 
            vec.add(5); 
            vec.add(6); 
            vec.add(7); 
      
            // insert 10 at the index 7 
            vec.insertElementAt(10, 7); 
      
            // checking vector 
            System.out.println(" Vector: " + vec); 
        } 
    } 

    Output:

         Vector: [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 10]
```

# Stack

``` java
// Java code for stack implementation 

import java.io.*; 
import java.util.*; 

class Test 
{ 
	// Pushing element on the top of the stack 
	static void stack_push(Stack<Integer> stack) 
	{ 
		for(int i = 0; i < 5; i++) 
		{ 
			stack.push(i); 
		} 
	} 
	
	// Popping element from the top of the stack 
	static void stack_pop(Stack<Integer> stack) 
	{ 
		System.out.println("Pop :"); 

		for(int i = 0; i < 5; i++) 
		{ 
			Integer y = (Integer) stack.pop(); 
			System.out.println(y); 
		} 
	} 

	// Displaying element on the top of the stack 
	static void stack_peek(Stack<Integer> stack) 
	{ 
		Integer element = (Integer) stack.peek(); 
		System.out.println("Element on stack top : " + element); 
	} 
	
	// Searching element in the stack 
	static void stack_search(Stack<Integer> stack, int element) 
	{ 
		Integer pos = (Integer) stack.search(element); 

		if(pos == -1) 
			System.out.println("Element not found"); 
		else
			System.out.println("Element is found at position " + pos); 
	} 

	public static void main (String[] args) 
	{ 
		Stack<Integer> stack = new Stack<Integer>(); 

		stack_push(stack); 
		stack_pop(stack); 
		stack_push(stack); 
		stack_peek(stack); 
		stack_search(stack, 2); 
		stack_search(stack, 6); 
	} 
} 

```

# Methods in Stack class

01. Object push(Object element) : Pushes an element on the top of the stack.
02. Object pop() : Removes and returns the top element of the stack. An ‘EmptyStackException’ exception is thrown if we call pop() when the invoking stack is empty.
03. Object peek() : Returns the element on the top of the stack, but does not remove it.
04. boolean empty() : It returns true if nothing is on the top of the stack. Else, returns false.
05. int search(Object element) : It determines whether an object exists in the stack. If the element is found, it returns the position of the element from the top of the stack. Else, it returns -1.

